[Music]
for Mexican War
in sensitivity to intelligence needs
persisted in Washington during the next
three decades when general Zachary
Taylor marched into the recently annexed
Republic of Texas he had little useful
information about the terrain or natural
defenses of the territory when Texas was
admitted to the Union in December 1845
Taylor advanced to the Rio Grande to
repel an anticipated Mexican attack On
February 6th 1846 the army received
notification that field maneuvers might
be ordered on short notice
quote for six months while at Corpus
Christi although he had engineers and
although traders were streaming through
the place from beyond the Rio Grande
Taylor did not even know the way to
Matamoros so wrote Lieutenant Colonel II
a Hitchcock then commanding the third
infantry whose diary and papers are now
in the Library of Congress it was not
until February 24th that the necessary
data were procured not until March 8th
that the army began to move a light unit
for scouting purposes was an obvious
need and william L Marcy the Secretary
of War had given Taylor Express orders
to call for assistance from the Texans
by whom legs were valued chiefly as the
means of sticking to a horse yet nothing
of the kind was done there was no
intelligence service dense ignorant
reigned at headquarters as to topography
or local conditions Taylor had been
instructed to learn all he could
regarding both and to keep the War
Department informed but in spite of
Marcy's earnest requests he appears to
have forwarded nothing whatever and to
have had no useful ideas about the
campaign Napoleon had said that any
general who when taking the field in a
peopled country neglected intelligence
service was a general ignorant of his
trade end quote
contrary to the advice of General
Winfield Scott who was about to enter
the field Taylor made no effort to
recruit disgruntled contraband east
us-mexican border folks killed and
smuggle
and otherwise unhappy with their own
government as spies or informers he
marched to Monterrey without utilizing
Scouts without almost any precautions
against surprise attack and assuming he
would encounter no serious resistance in
seizing the city without any real
information as to the fortifications or
defenses he would encounter when General
Scott landed at Veracruz with his army
in March 1847 Lieutenant Colonel
Hitchcock previously serving with Taylor
in the north had joined his expedition
serving as assistant inspector general
by his own account it would appear that
it was Hitchcock who recruited and
organized the spy forces which had been
urged on Taylor and subsequently served
Scotts so well on June 5th 1847
Hitchcock noted in his diary that he had
taken into service quote a very
celebrated captain of robbers end quote
who quote knows the band and the whole
country end quote
this was Dominguez whom Hitchcock tested
with the delivery of a communique quote
and if he performs the service
faithfully I shall further employ him
end quote
two weeks later Hitchcock recorded his
return with a letter of response thus
was the Mexican spy company or spy
company or the 40 thieves as it came to
be known established quote Dominguez
leader of the spy company had been an
honest weaver
it was said but on being robbed by a
Mexican officer took to the road and
became a brigand chief when the
Americans reached Puebla he was living
there quietly with his family but
knowing the insecurity of his position
he accepted Hitchcock's offer to become
a scout his band consisted at first of
five men but rose to about 100 and
probably might have been increased to
2,000 he and men of his even entered the
Capitol in disguise while he was at the
head of the company the actual captain
was a Virginian named Spooner who had
been a member of his band and the two
lieutenants were also foreigners the men
seemed to have served and obeyed orders
faithfully and their leader refused very
advantageous terms offered by Santa Anna
end quote eventually Hitchcock obtained
the release of some of Dominguez
compatriots from local jails arranged to
pay each recruit $20 a month organized
the band into companies and placed them
under the direct orders of general Scott
with Dominguez acting as leader of the
forces while the spy company was most
useful to Scott its members were
regarded as loathsome
and immoral by many of the officers and
men of the army dr. Albert G Brackett a
lieutenant with General Joseph lanes
forces under Scott's command has penned
the following firsthand observation
quote the Contra guerrillas under
Dominguez were a rascally set of fellows
and I never could look upon them with
any degree of sympathy traitors to their
own country in the darkest hour of Stern
trial they aided the Americans against
their own countrymen and covered
themselves with lasting infamy there is
an old saying we love the treason but
despised the traitor which did not hold
good with us we loathed the treason and
cursed the traitor every man in the
company was a jailbird and a worse body
of men could not have been collected
together I once rode from the National
bridge to an Cerro with a squadron of
these chaps and was the only American
with them I had been carrying an order
down from an Cerro to the bridge and was
on my return they rode along singing Rai
Bald songs discharging their escapades a
short rifle or carbine every few minutes
and behaving in the most unsold like
manner they had a few women along with
them who seemed to be as thoroughly
steeped and vice as the men each man
carried a lance and wore a wide red band
around his hat
Mexican treachery is proverbial and
these contra guerrillas were a complete
embodiment of it on first seeing them I
thought very much as one of our Irish
soldiers did may the devil fly away
wouldn't him for a set of ragamuffins
end quote undoubtedly those in the spy
company were aware of these resentments
and prejudices and a trace of that
feeling can be detected in this brief
passage and a letter from Captain Robert
Anderson third artillery to his mother
quote we have an hour pay a company of
Mexicans who are called the forty
thieves they are I expect some of the
gentlemen robbers Thompson mentions they
were asked the other day if they would
not be afraid of being murdered by their
countrymen for acting with us after we
left the country and their captain's
answer was that is our business we will
take care of ourselves they are very
useful in getting information etc and
are used individually or collectively as
their services are required the captain
says he can increase his band to 1,500
or 2,000 if a greater number be wanted
than he now has end quote
indeed what was the fate of the spy
company as an American victory became
apparent quote as danger diminished so
did the need for the irregular
services promises of payment remained
promises only apparently President Polk
had an appropriation he could utilize
for such things and it would seem that
he drew on it but either the commitments
were made by irresponsible people or the
political and military machines simply
were not set up to administer such
unorthodox operations despite the
official sounding name of spy company
some officers of high personal integrity
paid out of their own pockets when they
did it was their own decision and their
own loss as far as the government was
concerned with the signing of peace even
these amenities stopped the once
sought-after irregular swerve and heed
about even ordered from camps doubtless
the qualities which had been found
useful to the army now posed threats
or at least embarrassment and their
possessors were classed as undesirable
some were ordered to get out of the
country others still in the United
States were advised that the best that
could be done for them was an offer of
transportation to the border and freedom
to cross into Mexico the one area on the
face of the globe where they could not
live at least not for long
end quote in his diary entry of June 5th
1848 Hitchcock records he was to
discharge the spy company quote with
their own consent by paying them $20 per
man at Veracruz except the chief
Dominguez who will go to New Orleans end
quote
those electing to remain in service
quote expect to go to Campeche on an
expedition proposed by General Lane on
his own hook and quote as it does not
appear that the competing mission was
realized the remnants of the spy company
probably were dispersed into the
countryside without any further American
payments to pursue their old craft as
bandits another account regarding the
fate of the spy company says simply that
its members quote were offered $20 a
piece and a trip to Texas
end quote thus it remains uncertain as
to how many in the Mexican spy company
received final compensation for their
services and beyond this how many were
left to fend for themselves in their
homeland or were removed to the United
States while the spy company has
generally thought to have provided
useful intelligence for General Scott
it's unique nature and the experience of
United States Armed Forces in the
Mexican hostilities prompt agreement
with the conclusion that quote the war
with Mexico gave many American officers
a certain practical training for Civil
War marches and battlefields but from
its extempore a secret service little of
positive value could have been derived
end quote footnote brian page 118 of
passing interest is the difficulty
President Polk had in protecting his
secret diplomatic efforts
and the lack of any intelligence
organization to assist on this security
problem see Anna Caston Nelson secret
agents and security leaks President Polk
and the Mexican War journalism quarterly
v 52 spring 1975 9 through 14 98 and
footnote
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you